USING BANDPASS FILTERED HARMONIC COMPLEXES TO SIMULATE A 
COCHLEAR IMPLANT

The Vocode software described in this file is free for academic use. For commercial 
use please contact bob.carlyon@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk for more information.

When a large number of harmonics are summed in sine phase and then bandpass 
filtered, their waveform resembles that of a bandpass filtered pulse train. When the 
spacing between harmonics (i.e., the F0) is small relative to the bandwidths of the 
auditory filters excited by the complex, the pitch is derived from temporal cues rather 
than from the excitation pattern (Shackleton and Carlyon, 1994). Carlyon (1999)has 
argued that this, along with other features, makes bandpass filtered complexes a good 
analogue of the electrical pulse trains used in many cochlear implants. The analogy is 
tightest when one uses a single pulse train filtered into a high frequency region, and 
when the stimuli are presented against a noise background. In this case, basilar 
membrane ringing is minimised (as the auditory filters are wide at high centre 
frequencies), and the noise masks cochlear distortion products. Software for 
generating arbitrary bandpass-filtered pulse trains under these conditions is available 
from our website (www.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/simplant). It runs under windows 95 and 
was written by Rhodri Cusack.

VOCODE uses a slightly different approach. It extends Bob Shannon’s (1995) 
method of “encoding speech using primarily temporal cues”, in which he modulated 
bandlimited noises, to the modulation of bandpass filtered harmonic complexes. 
Carlyon (1999) argued that the harmonic complexes are a better analogy with 
electrical stimulation because the carrier is a deterministic stimulus. This allows you 
to try out strategies which could be also implemented electrically, for example using 
different carrier rates on different channels. A weakness is that, because speech is 
broadband, it is necessary to stimulate bands with low center frequencies, where 
harmonics of high fundamentals may be resolved. Hence there is the danger that by 
changing the F0 one may be introducing “place of excitation” cues to pitch. 

A partial solution is provided by the use of alternating phase complexes (in which the 
odd-numbered components are in sine phase and the even-numbered are in cosine 
phase). This doubles the number of peaks in the envelope, and, when pitch is 
processed using temporal cues, doubles the perceived pitch; however, when place-of-
excitation cues are present, the pitch remains unaltered because the power spectrum is 
untouched (Shackleton and Carlyon, 1994). This means that:

a) when pitch is encoded temporally you can get away with half the F0 and not affect 
the pitch markedly, and

b) you can check that pitch IS being perceived using temporal cues by switching to 
alternating phase and seeing if the pitch changes (IMPORTANT NOTE: this 
only works over headphones because the crappy speaker on your PC and the room 
acoustics will distort the phase spectrum).

The strictest way of implementing the test described in b) is to listen to each band 
separately and check that phase affects the pitch in each one. However, when resolved 
harmonics are present they tend to dominate pitch (Ritsma, 1967), so to a first 
approximation you can just set everything to alternating phase and see if the pitch 
changes.

Questions concerning the rationale and instructions contained in this file can be 
addressed to bob.carlyon@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk 
Questions on the code should be sent to j.lyzenga@azvu.nl

If you use the software and produced a published article I would be grateful for a 
copy, an acknowledgement, and for gratuitous references to my research.

Bob Carlyon, September 1999

References
Carlyon, R. P. (1999). "Using bandpass filtered harmonic complexes to investigate 
acoustic and electric hearing," 1999 Conference on Implantable Auditory Prostheses; 
Asilomar, CA.

Ritsma, R. J. (1967). "Frequencies dominant in the perception of the pitch of complex 
sounds,"  J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 42, 191-198. 

Shackleton, T. M. and Carlyon, R. P. (1994). "The role of resolved and unresolved 
harmonics in pitch perception and frequency modulation discrimination,"  J. Acoust. 
Soc. Am. 95, 3529-3540. 

Shannon, R. V., Zeng, F.-G., Kamath, V., Wygonski, J. and  Ekelid, M. (1995). 
"Speech recognition with primarily temporal cues,"  Science 270, 303-304. 
